---
layout: post
title: "Scratching the Surface featured in Eye Magazine"
categories:
- Work
description: "I'm honored to be included in a recent essay in Eye Magazine!"
hero: "/images/sts_eye.jpg"
herocap: "The Designer as Podcaster, Eye #98"
---

I’m honored to be included in the latest issue of *Eye* as part of a feature on the rise of design podcasts. The essay, [Designer as Podcaster](http://www.eyemagazine.com/feature/article/the-designer-as-podcaster) by Gabriela Matuszyk and Kate Evans, looks at Scratching the Surface and TypeRadio, as part of an emerging medium to talk about graphic design. They write:

> Current design practice can be so demanding for studio employees and freelancers, that taking a moment to press pause and engage in critical discourse can seem like a luxury. For many designers, attending a costly international conference is out of the question. Design podcasts are filling this gap, providing a low-cost space for reflection and debate; a testing ground for ideas; and an escape from creative isolation.

I spoke with Gabriela and Kate, two recent graduates of London College of Art, earlier this year by phone about the origins and goals of Scratching the Surface. It was a lovely conversation — that as all good interviews do, helped me clarify my own thinking too — and it was fun to see how they shaped it into the essay I think they captured what Scratching the Surface is all about:

> Questioning and thinking aloud remind us that design is a social act that requires engagement and collaboration. Scratching the Surface builds allies and a community of critical designers.

It’s surreal to see my name printed in *Eye*. I’ve loved this magazine for as long as I’ve been interested in design and always considered it the pinnacle of design writing. This is truly a dream come true. Thanks Kate and Gabriela!

They essay isn’t online yet but if you subscribe to the print issue, I hope you give it a read in issue 98!

